Python is an easy to learn, powerful programming language. It has efficient high-level data structures and
a simple but effective approach to object-oriented programming. Python’s elegant syntax and dynamic
typing, together with its interpreted nature, make it an ideal language for scripting and rapid application
development in many areas on most platforms.
The Python interpreter and the extensive standard library are freely available in source or binary form for all
major platforms from the Python Web site, https://www.python.org/, and may be freely distributed. The
same site also contains distributions of and pointers to many free third party Python modules, programs
and tools, and additional documentation.
The Python interpreter is easily extended with new functions and data types implemented in C or C++
(or other languages callable from C). Python is also suitable as an extension language for customizable
applications.
This tutorial introduces the reader informally to the basic concepts and features of the Python language
and system. It helps to have a Python interpreter handy for hands-on experience, but all examples are
self-contained, so the tutorial can be read off-line as well.
For a description of standard objects and modules, see library-index. reference-index gives a more formal
definition of the language. To write extensions in C or C++, read extending-index and c-api-index. There
are also several books covering Python in depth.
This tutorial does not attempt to be comprehensive and cover every single feature, or even every commonly
used feature. Instead, it introduces many of Python’s most noteworthy features, and will give you a good
idea of the language’s flavor and style. After reading it, you will be able to read and write Python modules
and programs, and you will be ready to learn more about the various Python library modules described in
library-index.
The Glossary is also worth going through.

WHETTING YOUR APPETITE
If you do much work on computers, eventually you find that there’s some task you’d like to automate. For
example, you may wish to perform a search-and-replace over a large number of text files, or rename and
rearrange a bunch of photo files in a complicated way. Perhaps you’d like to write a small custom database,
or a specialized GUI application, or a simple game.
If you’re a professional software developer, you may have to work with several C/C++/Java libraries but
find the usual write/compile/test/re-compile cycle is too slow. Perhaps you’re writing a test suite for such
a library and find writing the testing code a tedious task. Or maybe you’ve written a program that could
use an extension language, and you don’t want to design and implement a whole new language for your
application.
Python is just the language for you.
You could write a Unix shell script or Windows batch files for some of these tasks, but shell scripts are best
at moving around files and changing text data, not well-suited for GUI applications or games. You could
write a C/C++/Java program, but it can take a lot of development time to get even a first-draft program.
Python is simpler to use, available on Windows, Mac OS X, and Unix operating systems, and will help you
get the job done more quickly.
Python is simple to use, but it is a real programming language, offering much more structure and support
for large programs than shell scripts or batch files can offer. On the other hand, Python also offers much
more error checking than C, and, being a very-high-level language, it has high-level data types built in, such
as flexible arrays and dictionaries. Because of its more general data types Python is applicable to a much
larger problem domain than Awk or even Perl, yet many things are at least as easy in Python as in those
languages.
Python allows you to split your program into modules that can be reused in other Python programs. It
comes with a large collection of standard modules that you can use as the basis of your programs — or as
examples to start learning to program in Python. Some of these modules provide things like file I/O, system
calls, sockets, and even interfaces to graphical user interface toolkits like Tk.
Python is an interpreted language, which can save you considerable time during program development
because no compilation and linking is necessary. The interpreter can be used interactively, which makes it
easy to experiment with features of the language, to write throw-away programs, or to test functions during
bottom-up program development. It is also a handy desk calculator.
Python enables programs to be written compactly and readably. Programs written in Python are typically
much shorter than equivalent C, C++, or Java programs, for several reasons:
• the high-level data types allow you to express complex operations in a single statement;
• statement grouping is done by indentation instead of beginning and ending brackets;
• no variable or argument declarations are necessary.
Python is extensible: if you know how to program in C it is easy to add a new built-in function or module
to the interpreter, either to perform critical operations at maximum speed, or to link Python programs to
libraries that may only be available in binary form (such as a vendor-specific graphics library). Once you
3
Python Tutorial, Release 3.7.0
are really hooked, you can link the Python interpreter into an application written in C and use it as an
extension or command language for that application.
By the way, the language is named after the BBC show “Monty Python’s Flying Circus” and has nothing
to do with reptiles. Making references to Monty Python skits in documentation is not only allowed, it is
encouraged!
Now that you are all excited about Python, you’ll want to examine it in some more detail. Since the best
way to learn a language is to use it, the tutorial invites you to play with the Python interpreter as you read.
In the next chapter, the mechanics of using the interpreter are explained. This is rather mundane information,
but essential for trying out the examples shown later.
The rest of the tutorial introduces various features of the Python language and system through examples,
beginning with simple expressions, statements and data types, through functions and modules, and finally
touching upon advanced concepts like exceptions and user-defined classes.

USING THE PYTHON INTERPRETER
2.1 Invoking the Interpreter
The Python interpreter is usually installed as /usr/local/bin/python3.7 on those machines where it is
available; putting /usr/local/bin in your Unix shell’s search path makes it possible to start it by typing
the command:
python3.7
to the shell.1 Since the choice of the directory where the interpreter lives is an installation option, other
places are possible; check with your local Python guru or system administrator. (E.g., /usr/local/python
is a popular alternative location.)
On Windows machines, the Python installation is usually placed in C:\Program Files\Python37\, though
you can change this when you’re running the installer. To add this directory to your path, you can
type the following command into the command prompt in a DOS box:
set path=%path%;C:\Program Files\Python37\
Typing an end-of-file character (Control-D on Unix, Control-Z on Windows) at the primary prompt causes
the interpreter to exit with a zero exit status. If that doesn’t work, you can exit the interpreter by typing
the following command: quit().
The interpreter’s line-editing features include interactive editing, history substitution and code completion
on systems that support readline. Perhaps the quickest check to see whether command line editing is
supported is typing Control-P to the first Python prompt you get. If it beeps, you have command line
editing; see Appendix Interactive Input Editing and History Substitution for an introduction to the keys. If
nothing appears to happen, or if ^P is echoed, command line editing isn’t available; you’ll only be able to
use backspace to remove characters from the current line.
The interpreter operates somewhat like the Unix shell: when called with standard input connected to a tty
device, it reads and executes commands interactively; when called with a file name argument or with a file
as standard input, it reads and executes a script from that file.
A second way of starting the interpreter is python -c command [arg] ..., which executes the statement(s)
in command, analogous to the shell’s -c option. Since Python statements often contain spaces or other
characters that are special to the shell, it is usually advised to quote command in its entirety with single
quotes.
Some Python modules are also useful as scripts. These can be invoked using python -m module [arg] ...,
which executes the source file for module as if you had spelled out its full name on the command line.
When a script file is used, it is sometimes useful to be able to run the script and enter interactive mode
afterwards. This can be done by passing -i before the script.
1 On Unix, the Python 3.x interpreter is by default not installed with the executable named python, so that it does not
conflict with a simultaneously installed Python 2.x executable.
5
Python Tutorial, Release 3.7.0
All command line options are described in using-on-general.
2.1.1 Argument Passing
When known to the interpreter, the script name and additional arguments thereafter are turned into a list
of strings and assigned to the argv variable in the sys module. You can access this list by executing import
sys. The length of the list is at least one; when no script and no arguments are given, sys.argv[0] is an
empty string. When the script name is given as '-' (meaning standard input), sys.argv[0] is set to '-'.
When -c command is used, sys.argv[0] is set to '-c'. When -m module is used, sys.argv[0] is set to
the full name of the located module. Options found after -c command or -m module are not consumed by
the Python interpreter’s option processing but left in sys.argv for the command or module to handle.
2.1.2 Interactive Mode
When commands are read from a tty, the interpreter is said to be in interactive mode. In this mode it prompts
for the next command with the primary prompt, usually three greater-than signs (>>>); for continuation lines
it prompts with the secondary prompt, by default three dots (...). The interpreter prints a welcome message
stating its version number and a copyright notice before printing the first prompt